# 1.1

> A powerful programming language is more than just a means for instructing a
> computer to perform tasks.
> The language also serves as a framework within which we organize our ideas
> about processes.
> Thus, when we describe a language, we should pay particular attention to the
> means that the language provides for combining simple ideas to form more
> complex ideas.
>
> Page 4

A programming language has 3 components for structuring ideas:

- _Primitive expressions_: the atomic elements of the language.
- _Means of combination_: connect separate things.
- _Means of abstraction_: make connected things into one thing.

Applicative order versus normal order of evaluation:

- _Applicative order_ ("evaluate the arguments and then apply"): all expressions
  are evaluated at the point where they are first encountered.
- _Normal order_ ("fully expand and then reduce"): an expression is not
  evaluated until its value is needed.

> A user should not need to know how the procedure is implemented in order to
> use it.
>
> Page 27

**Bound variable**

Function parameters are "bound variables" because they are bound
to the function's arguments.
The value of a bound variable depends on a function invocation.
The meaning of a function does not change by changing the name of a bound
variable.

**Free variable**

Free variables are not bound by a function.
Changing the name of a free variable in a function definition will change (and
maybe break) the function.

**Block structure**

Defining subprocedures within a procedure so they are hidden from the global
namespace.

**Lexical scoping**

All locally defined procedures have access to the bound variables in scope.
Thus, subprocedures do not need to include these variables as parameters.

## Defining the `sqrt` procedure

Heron of Alexandria's [method](https://www.mathpages.com/home/kmath190.htm) for
approximating a square root:

1. Start with a number `x`.
1. Make a reasonable guess `y` for the square root, where `(y * y) <= x`.
1. Check if the guess is good enough.
1. If not, refine the guess with this formula: `next-guess = (guess + N/guess) / 2`.
1. Repeat until the guess is good enough.

Why this works:

The next-guess formula increases `guess` without ever making `guess` bigger than
the square root of `x`.
By repeating, `guess` is made more and more accurate, until the accuracy is good
enough.

### Questions

_Why is `good-enough?` defined with `abs`?_

The book uses:

```scheme
(< (abs (- (cube guess) x)) 0.001)
```

This seems equivalent to:

```scheme
(< (- x (cube guess)) 0.001)
```

But if I use the second definition, `sqrt` gives the wrong answer.

_Are local definitions (e.g. defined in a let expression) free or bound
variables?_

It appears that these are neither bound nor free, but a third category: "local 
variables".

> In computer programming, the term free variable refers to variables used in a
> function that are neither local variables nor parameters of that function.
>
> &mdash; [Wikipedia: Free variables and bound variables](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_variables_and_bound_variables)
