# 1.3 Formulating Abstractions with Higher-Order Procedures

> One of the things we should demand from a powerful programming language is the
> ability to build abstractions by assigning names to common patterns and then
> to work in terms of the abstractions directly.
>
> &mdash; Page 75

Procedures are the fundamental mechanism for creating abstractions.
Procedures that manipulate procedures, called higher-order procedures, are
significantly increase the abstraction power of the language.

Defining anonymous functions inline is a convenient way to avoid giving
trivial functions awkward names.

## Deriving let expressions

A let expression is used to define local variables.
This procedure re-uses two subexpressions `(+ 1 (* x y))` and `(- 1 y)`.

```lisp
(define f (x y)
  (+ (* x (square (+ 1 (* x y))))
     (* y (- 1 y))
     (* (+ 1 (* x y))
        (- 1 y))))
```

It would be convenient to bind these subexpressions to a local variable.
This can be done with a function.

```lisp
(define f (x y)
  (define local-vars (a b)
    (+ (* x (square a))
       (* y b)
       (* a b)))
  (local-vars (+ 1 (* x y))
              (- 1 y)))
```

The function parameters act as local variables.
Bind the variables to those local variables by calling the functions.
This is simplified even more using an immediately-invoked anonymous function.

```lisp
(define f (x y)
  ((lambda (a b)
    (+ (* x (square a))
       (* y b)
       (* a b)))
   (+ 1 (* x y))
   (- 1 y)))
```

This is a common and convenient pattern.
So a special form let was added.

```
(let ((<sym1> <exp1>) 
      (<sym2> <exp2>) 
      (<sym3> <exp3>)) 
    (<body>))
```

The body of the let expression is the scope of the variables.

So a `let` expression, or `let-in` in Haskell, desugars to an immediately
invoked anonymous function where the parameters are the locally bound variables.

## General methods of computation

Higher-order procedures can be used to abstract over classes of computation.
SICP presents the example of the notion of summation versus specific summations.
You can define a higher-order procedure that abstracts over the core logic of
any summation, and provide it functions that handle the specifics of a given 
summation.
By "general method", they mean this kind of abstraction.

## Zeroing a function

Terms

- root of an equation: the root of an equation is a value of x for which 
  `f(x) = 0` is true.
- continuous function: a function is continuous when sufficiently small changes
  in the input correspond to (arbitrary) changes in output.
  When you graph a continuous function, you get a single unbroken line.

Half-interval method is a technique for finding the root of an equation 
`f(x) = 0` where `f` is a continuous function.
Given two points `a` and `b` and the condition `f(a) < 0 < f(b)`, `f` must have at 
least one zero between `a` and `b`.

Half-interval method:

- let `x` be the average of `a` and `b`
- compute `f(x)`
- if `f(x) > 0`, `f` must have a zero between `a` and `x` (basically replace `b`
  with `x` in the condition `f(a) < 0 < f(b)`.
- if `f(x) < 0`, then `f` must have a zero between `x` and `b`.
- repeat these steps to keep bringing `a` and `b` closer together.
- stop when close enough

```lisp
(define (search f neg-point pos-point) 
  (let ((midpoint (average neg-point pos-point))) 
      (if (close-enough? neg-point pos-point)
        midpoint
        (let ((test-value (f midpoint)))
          (cond ((positive? test-value)
                 (search f neg-point midpoint)) 
                ((negative? test-value)
                 (search f midpoint pos-point)) 
                (else midpoint))))))

(define close-enough? (x y) (< (abs (- x y)) 0.001))
```

Then they wrap `search` in a second that enforces `neg-point` is a negative 
number and `pos-point` is a positive number.

## Finding the fixed point of a function

The fixed point of a function is a value of `x` where `f(x) = x`.
One method to find the fixed point of a function is to apply `f` repeatedly
until the condition holds true: `f(x), f(f(x)), f(f(f(x)))`.

```lisp
(define tolerance 0.0001)
(define (fixed-point f first-guess)
  (define (close-enough? v1 v2) 
    (< (abs (- v1 v2)) 
       tolerance))
  (define (try guess) 
    (let ((next (f guess))) 
      (if (close-enough? guess next)
        next
        (try guess))))
  (try first-guess))
```

Finding the square root of a number can be expressed as finding a fixed point.
The square root of some number `x` requires finding a `y` so that `y^2 = x`.
This is equivalent to `y = x/y`.
So the square root of x is the fixed point of the function `y = x / y`.
So here is another way to formulate the square root function:

```lisp
(define (sqrt x) 
  (fixed-point (lambda (y) (/ x y)) 
               1.0))
```

The problem with this implementation is that it gets stuck in an infinite loop.

To prevent this, use the "average damping" technique.

```lisp
(define (sqrt x)
  (fixed-point (lambda (y) (average y (/ x y))) 
               0.1))
```

## First-class procedures

A computational element of a programming language is said to be "first-class"
if it has the fewest restrictions on how it can be manipulated.
The "rights and privileges" of first-class elements are:

- May be named by variables
- May be passed as arguments to procedures
- May be returned as the results of procedures
- May be included in data structures

A language with first class procedures may be harder to implement in a 
performant way.
This is because you have to store the local bindings for a procedure even when
you aren't evaluating the procedure.
So the memory use can expand more than a language that doesn't allow you to 
pass procedures around.


