# 2 Building Abstractions with Data

Needs for compound data:

- elevates the conceptual level of program design
- programs become more modular
- the language becomes more expressive

Defining procedures elevates the conceptual level above the base level of the
language's built-in operations.
Defining compound data elevates the conceptual level above the base level of the
language's built-in datatypes.

## 2.1 Introduction to Data Abstraction

**Procedural abstraction** is the notion that a procedure can stand for a
concept, an abstraction, that is independent of the procedure's implementation
details.
Procedures with different implementations can stand for the same abstraction,
because they behave in the same way.

**Data abstraction** is the counterpart of procedural abstraction, but for
data structures instead of algorithms.
Data abstraction separates how the data is used from the details of how the
data is constructed from more primitive data types.

> Our programs should use data in such a way as to make no assumptions about the
> data that are not strictly necessary for performing the task at hand.
>
> Page 113

**Abstract data** is a notion of operating on data without making an assumption
about its concrete type.
The operation just assumes properties of the data that are required to carry do
the operation.

**Concrete data** is a representation of data defined independent of the
operations on that data.

Separate the representation of data and operations on the data.
`selectors` and `constructors` are the interface between these two parts of the
system.

### 2.1.1 Example: Arithmetic Operations for Rational Numbers

Want to implement the following operations for rational numbers:

- add
- subtract
- multiply
- divide
- test equality

The "constructor" creates a rational number from two numbers: a numerator and a
denominator.

```lisp
(make-rat <numerator> <denominator>)
```

There are two "selectors", one for the numerator and one for the denominator.
Given a rational number, each selector returns the corresponding part.

```lisp
(numer <rational number>)
(denom <rational number>)
```

The constructor and the selector permit us to define our arithmetic operations
without knowing the implementation details of the rational number's
representation.

For example:

```lisp
(define (add-rat x y)
  (make-rat (+ (* (numer x) (denom y))
               (* (numer y) (denom x)))
            (+ (denom x) (denom y))))
```

This design approach is using a strategy called "wishful thinking" - working at
the high level first.
For example, defining operations in terms of `make-rat`, `numer`, and `denom`
without having defined those operations.

To define a rational number data type, and to define the constructor and
selectors, a way to "glue" together the numerator and the denominator is needed.

### Pairs

In Lisp, a pair is constructed with the operation `cons`.
`cons` takes two arguments and returns a compound data structure containing
those two arguments.
`car` and `cdr` are selectors:

- `car`: get the first item in a pair
- `cdr`: get the second item in a pair

A pair can contain another pair, arbitrarily recursive.
Pairs are a common building block for complex data objects.
A data object constructed from a pair is called _list-structured data_.

Pairs can be used to create rational numbers:

```lisp
(define make-rat cons)
(define numer car)
(define denom cdr)

(define (print-rat x)
  (newline)
  (display (numer x))
  (display "/")
  (display (denom x)))
```

More complex behavior can be added to `make-rat` without the caller knowing
about it.
For example, you could add input validation, reduce a rational number to its
lowest terms, etc.

### 2.1.2 Abstraction barriers

The basic idea of data abstraction is to define a set of operations that will be
used for _all_ manipulations of that data.
So programs built on top of this data don't deal with the data's representation
directly, but go through the interface of these fundamental operations.

These interfaces are abstraction barriers - they separate higher and lower
levels of the system.
`cons`, `car`, and `cdr` are an abstraction barrier between the representation of
a pair and any layer that uses a pair.
The representation of a pair can change as long as the behavior of `cons`, `car`
and `cdr` are preserved.

These barriers make it possible to make changes to the data representation for
purposes like optimisation without having to change a lot of unrelated code.

### 2.1.3 What Is Meant by Data

What does "data" mean?

> In general, we can think of data as defined by some collection of selectors
> and constructors, together with specified conditions that these procedures
> must fulfill in order to be a valid representation.
>
> Page 123

This means that a pair can be represented with a procedure:

```lisp
(define (cons x y) 
  (define (dispatch n) 
    (cond ((= n 0) x)
          ((= n 1) y)
          (else (error "Argument not 0 or 1")))))

(define (car p) (p 0))
(define (cdr p) (p 1))
```

Anyone using the `cons`, `car`, `cdr` interface cannot distinguish between this
implementation of pair and any other implementation.

Procedural representation of data is often called **message passing**.

#### Church numerals

Church numerals are a way of encoding nonnegative integers as functions.
A Church numeral is a function that takes a function `f` and returns a function
that takes a value `x`, and applies `f` to `x` n times, where n is the number
that the Church numeral encodes.

```
\f. \x. x - zero
\f. \x. f x - one
\f. \x. f f x - two
\f. \x. f f f x - three
```

You can implement arithmetic for Church numerals:

```
\n. \f. \x. f n f x
```

##### Peano axioms

- 0 is a natural number.
- If n is a natural number, then Sn is a natural number.

S is the "successor" of n, which is n + 1.

Peano numbers are:

- zero = zero
- one = S(zero)
- two = S(S(zero))
- three = S(S(S((zero)))

In the Lambda calculus, it's possible to represent S(n), since function 
application can be represented.
But it's not clear how to represent zero or S.
The way around this in the Lambda calculus is to inject zero and S as arguments.

- zero = \z s. z
- one = \z s. s z
- two = \z s. s (s z)
- three = \z s. s (s (s z))

- zero = \z s. z
- successor = \n. \z s. s (n z s)

So any time you have an `n`, then you must have inject `z` and `s`.

```scheme
(define zero (lambda (z s) z))
```

#### Church encoding

Church encoding is not just for numbers.
Church encoding can be used to represent arbitrary algebraic datatypes.

**Booleans**

```
\f t. f - false
\f t. t - true
```

**Tuple**

```
\p . p x y
```

**Sum types**

Where do the free variables `x` and `y` come from?

```
data Either = Left x | Right y
\l r. l x
\l r. r y
```

**Lists**

But the question is, where do the free variables come from?
Are they not bound to anything?

```
data List a = Nil | Cons a (List a)
\n c. n
\n c. c a l
```

```
compose f g x = f (g x)
```

```
zero = \z s. z
one = \z s. s z
two = \z s. s (s z)
three = \z s. s (s (s z))
add = \a b. \z s. a (b z s) s

(\a b. \z s. b (a z s) s) (\z s. z) (\z s. s z) -- 0 + 1
(\b. \z s. b ((\z s. z) z s) s) (\z s. s z)
(\b. \z s. b z s) (\z s. s z)
(\z s. (\z s. s z) z s)
(\z s. s z) -- 1

(\a b. \z s. b (a z s) s) (\z s. s z) (\z s. s (s z)) --- 1 + 2
(\b. \z s. b ((\z s. s z) z s) s) (\z s. s (s z))
(\b. \z s. b ((\z s. s z) z s) s) (\z s. s (s z))
(\b. \z s. b (s z) s) (\z s. s (s z))
(\z s. (\z s. s (s z)) (s z) s)
(\z s. s (s (s z)))
```

```
zero = \s. \z. z
one = \s. \z. s z
two = \s. \z. s (s z)
three = \s. \z. s (s (s z))

mult = \a. \b. \s. \z. a (b s) z

(\a. \b. \s. \z. a (b s) z) (\s. \z. z) (\s. \z. s z) -- 1 * 0
(\b. \s. \z. (\s. \z. z) (b s) z) (\s. \z. s z)
(\s. \z. (\s. \z. z) (\z. s z) z)
(\s. \z. (\z. z) z)
(\s. \z. z) -- 0

(\a. \b. \s. \z. a (b s) z) (\s. \z. s z) (\s. \z. s (s z)) -- 1 * 2
(\b. \s. \z. (\s. \z. s z) (b s) z) (\s. \z. s (s z))
(\s. \z. (\s. \z. s z) (\z. s (s z)) z)
(\s. \z. (\z. (\z. s (s z)) z) z)
(\s. \z. (\z. s (s z)) z)
(\s. \z. s (s z)) -- 2
```

#### Church numerals

Church numerals encode nonnegative integers as functions.
Church numerals are related to Peano numbers.

Peano numbers have two components:

- The number zero.
- The successor function S, where S(n) is n + 1.

A Peano number `n` is `n` copies of S(0), e.g. 1 is S(0) and 2 is S(S(0)).

To use Peano numbers in the Lambda calculus would require a primitive zero value
and a built-in successor function.
But the Lambda calculus has only Lambda functions and variables.
So the Lambda calculus takes a slightly different approach: a number is 
represented as a function that takes two arguments: the successor function and
the zero value, and applies S to zero n times.

```
\s. \z. z - zero
\s. \z. s z - one
\s. \z. s (s z) - two
\s. \z. s (s (s z)) - three
```

Where do s and z come from?
That's beyond the scope of the program.
Church numerals say, so long as you can provide these two dependencies, you have
a valid representation of natural numbers.

To be valid numbers, we must be able to do arithmetic.
Here is `add` for the Church numerals:

```
\a. \b. \s. \z. a s (b s z)
```

Remember that a Church numeral is S applied n times to zero.
That is like saying add 0 + n.
So we can get addition by changing the zero value, to some value `k`.
The addition function first computes `b` by applying the successor and zero to 
`b`. 
Then it uses `b` as the zero number for a.
Now `a` moves n numbers forward from `b` instead of n numbers forward from zero.

Multiplication works by modifying the successor function.

```
\a. \b. \s. \z. a (b s) z
```

I'm not exactly sure how to describe what this is doing:

```
(\a. \b. \s. \z. a (b s) z) (\s. \z. s (s z)) (\s. \z. s (s z)) - 2 * 2
(\b. \s. \z. (\s. \z. s (s z)) (b s) z) (\s. \z. s (s z))
(\s. \z. (\s. \z. s (s z)) ((\s. \z. s (s z)) s) z)
(\s. \z. (\s. \z. s (s z)) (\z. s (s z)) z)
(\s. \z. (\z. ((\z. s (s z) ((\z. s (s z)) z)) z)
(\s. \z. ((\z. s (s z)) (s (s z))))
(\s. \z. (s (s (s (s z))))) - 4
```


**Questions**

- Why is one called "number" and the other "numeral"?
- Were Church numerals developed for the Lambda calculus?
