# 2.2 Hierarchical Data and the Closure Property

Pairs can contain pairs.
This is the essence of their usefulness in representing other kinds of 
structures.

An operation for constructing data satisfies the **closure property** if the 
output of that operation can be used as an input.
Pairs satisfy the closure property because the output of `cons`, a pair, can 
also be an input to `cons`.
Closure is a powerful and essential property because it enables the construction
of hierarchical data structures.
A hierarchical structure is one where each part itself contains parts of the 
same kind.

**Closure** is a term from abstract algebra.
A set of element is "closed" under an operation if applying the operation to 
elements of a set produces an element that is again an element of the set.
This is not related to closure in the sense of functions with free variables.

## 2.2.1 Representing Sequences

Pairs can be used to build a "sequence".
A sequence is an ordered collection of data objects.
There are several ways to represent a sequence in terms of a pair.
One simple way is a chain of pairs:

```lisp
(cons 1 (cons 2 (cons 3 nil)))
```


This kind of sequence is called a `list`.
`nil` is the empty list.
Scheme provides a `list` constructor:

```lisp
(list <x1> <x2> ... <xn>)
```

Then `car` selects the first item in the list and `cdr` selects the tail of the
list.

### List operations

`list-ref` returns the nth item in a list.

```lisp
(define (list-ref n xs) 
  (cond ((= n 0) (car xs)) 
        (else (list-ref (- n 1) (cdr xs)))))
```

`length` returns the length of a list.

Here is a recursive version:

```lisp
(define (length xs) 
  (if (null? xs) 
      0 
      (+ 1 (length (cdr xs)))))
```

and here is an iterative version:

```lisp
(define (length xs) 
  (define (iter a count) 
    (if (null? a) 
        count
        (iter (cdr a) (+ 1 count))))
  (iter xs 0))
```

```lisp
(define (append xs ys) 
  (cond ((null? xs) ys)
        ((null? ys) xs) 
        (cons (car xs) (append (cdr xs) ys))))
```

```lisp
(define (last-pair xs)
  (if (null? (cdr xs))
      xs
      (last-pair (cdr xs))))
```

```lisp
(define (reverse xs) 
  (if (null? xs) 
      xs
      (append (reverse (cdr xs)) 
              (cons (car xs) '()))))
```

### Mapping over lists

`map` abstracts over the pattern of applying a transformation to each item in a
list.

For example:

```lisp
(define (scale-list items factor) 
  (map (lambda (x) (* x factor)) 
       items))

(scale-list (2 4 6) 2)
; (4 8 12)
```

> The difference between the two definitions is not that the computer is 
> performing a different process (it isn't) but that we think about the process
> differently. 
> 
> Page 144

**Abstractions like `map` change how we think about what we are doing**.

## 2.2.2 Hierarchical Structures

One way to think of a tree is as a sequence whose elements are sequences.

A tree with four leaves:

```lisp
(cons (cons 1 (cons 2 nil)) 
      (cons 3 (cons 4 nil)))
```

**Counting the leaves of a tree**

```lisp
(define (count-leaves t)
  (cond ((null? t) 0) 
        ((not (pair? t)) 1)
        (else (+ (count-leaves (car t)) 
                 (count-leaves (cdr t))))))
```

### Mapping over trees

Many tree operations can be implemented in terms of list operations and 
recursion.

Scale a tree by a factor, without map:

```lisp
(define tree (cons (cons 1 (cons 2 nil)) (cons 3 (cons 4 nil))))

(define (scale-tree tree factor) 
  (cond ((null? tree) nil) 
        ((not (pair? (car tree))) 
          (cons (* (car tree) factor) 
                (scale-tree (cdr tree) factor)))
        (else (cons (scale-tree (car tree) factor) 
                    (scale-tree (cdr tree) factor)))))
```

Scale a tree by a factor, with map:

```lisp
(define (scale-tree-2 tree factor) 
  (map (lambda (x) 
         (if (pair? x) 
             (scale-tree x factor) 
             (* x factor))) tree))
```

## 2.2.3 Sequences as Conventional Interfaces

`sum-odd-squares`: takes a tree as an argument and computes the sum of the 
squares of the odd leaves of the tree.

steps:

- Enumerate the leaves of the tree.
- Filter the leaves, selecting the odd ones.
- Square each selected leaf.
- Add up the selected.

`even-fibs`: construct a list of all the even Fibonacci numbers for Fib(K).

steps:

- Enumerate the integers 0 to n.
- Compute the Fibonacci number for each number.
- Filter, selecting the even ones.
- Add up the selected.

Signal flow structure conceptualizes these steps as a signal cascading through
stages, where each stage modifies the signal some way.

- Start with a signal (the given tree).
- Filter the signal.
- Map the signal.
- Accumulate the signal.

It's desirable that the code reflect this conceptual structure.

> The key to organizing programs so as to more clearly reflect the signal flow
> structure is to concentrate on the "signals" that flow from one stage of the 
> process to the next.
>
> Page 157

> One of the reasons for the success of Lisp as a programming language is that 
> lists provide a standard medium for expressing ordered collections so that 
> they can be manipulated using higher-order operations.
> The programming language APL owes much of its power and appeal to a similar 
> choice. 
> In APL, all data are represented as arrays, and there is a universal and 
> convenient set of generic operators for all sorts of array operations.
> 
> Page 161

### Nested mappings

Given a positive integer n, find all ordered pairs of distinct integers i and j,
where `1 <= j <= i <= n`, such that `i + j` is prime.
To implement this as a sequence operation:

```lisp
```

The composition of `map` and `accumulate` is called `flatmap`.

```lisp
(define (flatmap procedure sequence) 
  (accumulate append 
              nil 
              (map procedure sequence)))

(define (prime-sum? pair) 
  (prime? (+ (car pair) 
             (cdr pair))))

(define (make-pair-sum pair) 
  (list (car pair) 
        (cdr pair) 
        (+ (car pair) (cdr pair))))

(define (prime-sum-pairs n) 
  (map make-pair-sum 
       (filter prime-sum? 
               (flatmap (lambda (i) 
                          (map (lambda (j) (list i j)) 
                               (enumerate-interval 1 (- i 1)))) 
               (enumerate-interval 1 n)))))
```

## 2.2.4 Example: A Picture Language

A picture language

- Designed to experiment with patterns of repeated elements that are shifted 
  and scaled.
- These elements are procedures.
- The operations in this language satisfy the closure property, enabling the 
  creation of arbitrarily complicated patterns.

Describe a language in these terms:

- the language's primitives
- means of combination
- means of abstraction

### The picture language

One kind of element: a Painter.
A Painter renders an image within a frame.
The image is scaled/shifted to fit the frame.

There are higher-order procedures that transform painters.
Painters are "closed" under these operations, meaning that the operation takes
a Painter and returns a Painter.

Some of these higher-order procedures are combinators. They take two Painters
and use them to produce a third Painter. 
One example is `beside`, which combines two Painters to produce a Painter that 
renders the two images side-by-side.
Other higher-order functions do things like flip the image the Painter renders. 

Here is a new Painter created by vertically flipping the `wave` Painter and then
rendering it along the original wave image.

> As with building up list structure using `cons`, the closure of our data under
> the means of combination is crucial to the ability to create complex 
> structures while using only a few operations.
>
> Page 177

> Once we can combine painters, we would like to be able to abstract typical 
> patterns of combining painters. 
> We will implement the painter operations as Scheme procedures. 
> This means that we don't need a special abstraction mechanism in the picture 
> language. 
> Since hte means of combination are ordinary Scheme procedures, we 
> automatically have the capability to do anything with painter operations that
> we can do with procedures.
>
> Page 177

```scheme
(define wave2 (beside wave (flip-vert wave)))
```

This pattern can be abstracted as a higher-order procedure that can be applied 
to any procedure.

```scheme
(define (flipped-pairs painter)
  (let ((painter2 (beside painter (flip-vert painter))))
    (below painter2 painter2)))
```

Here is one that uses recursion to split and branch painters.

```scheme
(define (right-split painter n)
  (if (= n 0)
      painter
      (let ((smaller (right-split painter (- n 1))))
        (beside painter (below smaller smaller)))))
```

`let` syntax:

```scheme
(let ((<identifier> <value>) ...) <body expression>)
```

A note about `let` syntax because I forgot it.
`let` in scheme takes a list of pairs.
The first element in each pair is the identifier.
The second element in each pair is the value.
`let` binds the value to the identifier and evaluates the body expression in that
environment.
